Support slow Start mode in Envoy (#13176)
envoyproxy/envoy: docs/root/intro/arch_overview/upstream/load_balancing/slow_start.rst

.. _arch_overview_load_balancing_slow_start:

Slow start mode
===============

Slow start mode is a configuration setting in Envoy to progressively increase amount of traffic for newly added upstream endpoints.
With no slow start enabled Envoy would send a proportional amount of traffic to new upstream ednpoints.
This could be undesirable for services that require warm up time to serve full production load and could result in request timeouts, loss of data and deteriorated user experience.

Slow start mode is a mechanism that affects load balancing weight of upstream endpoints and can be configured per upstream cluster. 
Currently, slow start is supported in Round Robin and Least Request load balancer types.

> Users can specify a :ref:`slow start window parameter<envoy_v3_api_field_config.cluster.v3.Cluster.CommonLbConfig.SlowStartConfig.slow_start_window>` (in seconds), so that if endpoint “cluster membership duration" (amount of time since it has joined the cluster) is within the configured window, it enters slow start mode. 

Reviewer: ```“cluster```

Author: good catch, hard to spot

> .. _arch_overview_load_balancing_slow_start:

Reviewer 2: We need release notes for the general feature and all of the new fields.

Slow start mode
===============

Slow start mode is a configuration setting in Envoy to progressively increase amount of traffic for newly added upstream endpoints.

> With no slow start enabled Envoy would send a proportional amount of traffic to new upstream ednpoints.

Reviewer 3: Can you fix the spelling in this doc as well, please. I'm not sure why the build didn't catch this.. I thought it used to.

Author: was surprising to me as well, perhaps spell check does not run on new .rst files

Author: I was also surprised that spell check did not catch those, perhaps it does not cover new .rst files...Fixed (with online spell checker)

This could be undesirable for services that require warm up time to serve full production load and could result in request timeouts, loss of data and deteriorated user experience.

Slow start mode is a mechanism that affects load balancing weight of upstream endpoints and can be configured per upstream cluster.

> Currently, slow start is supported in Round Robin and Least Request load balancer types.

Reviewer 2: nit: can you ref link to the relevant fields for each type?

  NewWeight = {Weight*TimeFactor}^\frac{1}{Aggression}

where,

.. math::

  TimeFactor = \frac{max(TimeSinceStartInSeconds,1)}{SlowStartWindowInSeconds}

As time progresses, more and more traffic would be sent to endpoint within slow start window.

:ref:`Aggression parameter<envoy_v3_api_field_config.cluster.v3.Cluster.SlowStartConfig.aggression>` non-linearly affects endpoint weight and represents the speed of ramp-up.
By tuning aggression parameter, one could achieve polynomial or exponential speed for traffic increase.
Below simulation demonstrates how various values for aggression affect traffic ramp-up:

.. image:: /_static/slow_start_aggression.svg
   :width: 60%
   :align: center

Whenever a slow start window duration elapses, upstream endpoint exits slow start mode and gets regular amount of traffic according to load balancing algorithm.
Its load balancing weight will no longer be scaled with runtime bias and aggression. Endpoint could also exit slow start mode in case it leaves the cluster.

To reiterate, endpoint enters slow start mode:
  * If no active healthcheck is configured per cluster, immediately if its cluster membership duration is within slow start window.

>   * In case an active healthcheck is configured per cluster, when its cluster membership duration is within slow start window and endpoint has passed an active healthcheck.

Reviewer 2: Sorry not sure where we landed on this, but wouldn't it make sense in this case to start slow start once the first active health check has passed? cc @tonya11en 

I would be fine if this were a future enhancement but just curious if we discussed this previously.

Reviewer 3: That does make a lot more sense.. it just never occurred to me when I looked at it.

I'm in favor of starting the window upon the first successful HC, but given how long this PR has dragged on I think it should be in a subsequent diff. If we're in agreement, then I think a simple issue and link to this comment thread should suffice to track it.

Reviewer 2: Yes agree let's land and iterate. An issue is fine.

Author: +1 on opening a new issue (will do it tomorrow). also feeling a little bit exhausted from this pr taking so long

Reviewer 2: This issue still needs to be opened please or if it was link it here?

Author: Issue link: https://github.com/envoyproxy/envoy/issues/18351

.. _arch_overview_load_balancing_slow_start:

Slow start mode
===============

> Slow start mode is a configuration setting in Envoy to progressively increase amount of traffic for newly spawned service instances.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Slow start mode is a configuration setting in Envoy to progressively increase amount of traffic for newly added upstream endpoints.
```

Reviewer 2: (Similar changes to s/instances/endpoints, etc. elsewhere)

With no slow start enabled Envoy would send a proportional amount of traffic to new instances.
This could be undesirable for services that require warm up time to serve full production load and could result in request timeouts, loss of data and deteriorated user experience.

> Slow start mode is a weight-adjustment mechanism in number of load balancer types and can be configured per cluster basis. 

Reviewer 2: Can't quite parse. Can you rephrase?

Currently, slow start is supported in Round Robin and Least Request load balancer types.

Users can specify a slow start window parameter (in seconds), so that if host’s “cluster membership duration" (amount of time since it has joined the cluster) is within the configured window, it enters slow start mode, given that the host satisfies endpoint warming policy. 
Whenever a slow start window duration elapses, it exits slow start mode and gets regular amount of traffic acccording to load balanacing algorithm.
Host could also exit slow start mode in case it leaves the cluster.

To reiterate, host enters slow start mode when:
  * For :ref:`NO_WAIT<envoy_v3_api_enum_value_config.cluster.v3.Cluster.CommonLbConfig.EndpointWarmingPolicy.NO_WAIT>` endpoint warming policy, immediately if it's cluster membership duration is within slow start window.

>   * For :ref:`WAIT_FOR_FIRST_PASSING_HC<envoy_v3_api_enum_value_config.cluster.v3.Cluster.CommonLbConfig.EndpointWarmingPolicy.WAIT_FOR_FIRST_PASSING_HC>` endpoint warming policy, upon passing an active healthcheck, given that it's cluster membership duration is within slow start window.

Reviewer 2: I can't quite tell from reading this if you mean that the duration is implicitly extended by the duration until the first passing HC? Can you rephrase/expand?

Author: How is currently implemented:
With `WAIT_FOR_FIRST_PASSING_HC` policy, endpoint enters slow start if its creation time is within slow start window and if it has passed an active HC. Duration is not implicitly extended. Host exits slow start if it gets marked unhealthy (via priority update CB). Host could further re-enter slow start mode if it passes HC again and if it's creation date is still within slow start window. Name `WAIT_FOR_FIRST_PASSING_HC` is misleading, should be `WAIT_FOR_PASSING_HC` instead. This behaviour has not been discussed in initial RFC, i've came up with it during implementation. Happy to discuss more.

Host exists slow start mode when:
  * It leaves the cluster.
  * It's cluster membership duration is greater than slow start window.

>   * For :ref:`WAIT_FOR_FIRST_PASSING_HC<envoy_v3_api_enum_value_config.cluster.v3.Cluster.CommonLbConfig.EndpointWarmingPolicy.WAIT_FOR_FIRST_PASSING_HC>` endpoint warming policy, if host's health status changes to anything rather than `Healthy`.

Reviewer 2: I'm wondering if this makes sense? Should we still adhere to the duration if a host becomes unhealthy? It seems like maybe this could be simplified somewhat? Maybe I don't fully understand the use case.

> Below is example of how requests would be distributed across hosts with Round Robin Loadbalancer, slow start window of 10 seconds, `NO_WAIT` ednpoint warming policy and 0.5 time bias.

Reviewer 2: This is the first time you have discussed "time bias." Can you introduce this concept?

> Host H1 has statically configured initial weight of X and host H2 weight of Y, the actual numerical values are of no significance for this example.

Reviewer 2: s/Host/Endpoint and switch to E1, etc.

| 14          | LB select host |     NO     |    YES     |    X      |   0.5Y   |     H1      | 
+-------------+----------------+------------+------------+-----------+----------+-------------+
| 15          |LB select host  |     NO     |    YES     |    X      |   0.5Y   |     H2      | 
+-------------+----------------+------------+------------+-----------+----------+-------------+
| 22          | LB select host |     NO     |     NO     |    X      |    Y     |     H1      | 
+-------------+----------------+------------+------------+-----------+----------+-------------+
| 23          | LB select host |     NO     |     NO     |    X      |    Y     |     H2      | 
+-------------+----------------+------------+------------+-----------+----------+-------------+

.. _arch_overview_load_balancing_slow_start_endpoint_warming_policy_types:

Endpoint warming policy types
-----------------------------

Endpoint warming policy defines conditions for host to enter slow start mode.

No Wait
^^^^^^^

If configured, host would enter slow start immediately.

Wait For First Passing Healthcheck
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> If configured, host would enter slow start upon having passed an active healthcheck.

Reviewer 2: I think this can be moved back to the API docs, assuming we still need the policy after discussion.

.. _arch_overview_load_balancing_slow_start:

Slow start mode
===============

Slow start mode is a configuration setting in Envoy to progressively increase amount of traffic for newly added upstream endpoints.
With no slow start enabled Envoy would send a proportional amount of traffic to new upstream ednpoints.
This could be undesirable for services that require warm up time to serve full production load and could result in request timeouts, loss of data and deteriorated user experience.

Slow start mode is a mechanism that affects load balancing weight of upstream endpoints and can be configured per upstream cluster. 

> Currently, slow start is supported in Round Robin and Least Request load balancer types.

Reviewer 2: Do we fail the config if configured on other types currently?

Author: have not wrapped up this part of code yet, but RFC suggests that loading of config should fail if slow start is configured for unsupported lb type.

Author: this is no longer a case, as slow start config is included into specific lb type config (instead of being part of common lb config)

Users can specify a :ref:`slow start window parameter<envoy_v3_api_field_config.cluster.v3.Cluster.CommonLbConfig.SlowStartConfig.slow_start_window>` (in seconds), so that if endpoint “cluster membership duration" (amount of time since it has joined the cluster) is within the configured window, it enters slow start mode, given that the endpoint satisfies endpoint warming policy. 
During slow start window, load balancing weight of a particular endpoint will be scaled with :ref:`time bias parameter<envoy_v3_api_field_config.cluster.v3.Cluster.CommonLbConfig.SlowStartConfig.time_bias>`, e.g.:

> `weight = load_balancing_weight * time_bias`.

Reviewer 2: Same question as above, how does time itself factor in?

Whenever a slow start window duration elapses, upstream endpoint exits slow start mode and gets regular amount of traffic acccording to load balanacing algorithm.
Endpoint could also exit slow start mode in case it leaves the cluster.

To reiterate, endpoint enters slow start mode when:

>   * For :ref:`NO_WAIT<envoy_v3_api_enum_value_config.cluster.v3.Cluster.CommonLbConfig.SlowStartConfig.EndpointWarmingPolicy.NO_WAIT>` endpoint warming policy, immediately if it's cluster membership duration is within slow start window.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  * For :ref:`NO_WAIT<envoy_v3_api_enum_value_config.cluster.v3.Cluster.CommonLbConfig.SlowStartConfig.EndpointWarmingPolicy.NO_WAIT>` endpoint warming policy, immediately if its cluster membership duration is within slow start window.
```

>   * For :ref:`WAIT_FOR_FIRST_PASSING_HC<envoy_v3_api_enum_value_config.cluster.v3.Cluster.CommonLbConfig.SlowStartConfig.EndpointWarmingPolicy.WAIT_FOR_FIRST_PASSING_HC>` endpoint warming policy, if it's cluster membership duration is within slow start window and endpoint has passed an active healthcheck. 

Reviewer 2: Same question about what if HC is not configured.

>     If endpoint does not pass an active healcheck during entire slow start window (since it has been added to upstream cluster), then it never enter slow start mode.

Author: s/never enter/never enters

>     If endpoint does not pass an active healcheck during entire slow start window (since it has been added to upstream cluster), then it never enter slow start mode.

Reviewer 2: I still don't quite understand why we need this configuration. Can we just say that if active HC is configured slow start starts from the time of first passing HC, otherwise it starts immediately? It seems like we don't need this config immediately?

| 14          | LB select endpoint |     NO     |    YES     |    X      |   0.5Y   |     E1      | 
+-------------+--------------------+------------+------------+-----------+----------+-------------+
| 15          |LB select endpoint  |     NO     |    YES     |    X      |   0.5Y   |     E2      | 
+-------------+--------------------+------------+------------+-----------+----------+-------------+
| 22          | LB select endpoint |     NO     |     NO     |    X      |    Y     |     E1      | 
+-------------+--------------------+------------+------------+-----------+----------+-------------+
| 23          | LB select endpoint |     NO     |     NO     |    X      |    Y     |     E2      | 
+-------------+--------------------+------------+------------+-----------+----------+-------------+

.. _arch_overview_load_balancing_slow_start_endpoint_warming_policy_types:

Endpoint warming policy types
-----------------------------

Endpoint warming policy defines conditions for host to enter slow start mode.

No Wait
^^^^^^^

If configured, endpoint would enter slow start immediately.

Wait For First Passing Healthcheck
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> If configured, endpoint would enter slow start upon having passed an active healthcheck.

Reviewer 2: This can get deleted and just be in the API docs

  * If no active healthcheck is configured per cluster, immediately if its cluster membership duration is within slow start window.
  * In case an active healthcheck is configured per cluster, when its cluster membership duration is within slow start window and endpoint has passed an active healthcheck.
    If endpoint does not pass an active healcheck during entire slow start window (since it has been added to upstream cluster), then it never enters slow start mode.

Endpoint exits slow start mode when:
  * It leaves the cluster.
  * Its cluster membership duration is greater than slow start window.
  * It does not pass an active healcheck configured per cluster.
    Endpoint could further re-enter slow start, if it passes an active healtcheck and its creation time is within slow start window.

Below is example of how requests would be distributed across endpoints in same priority with Round Robin Loadbalancer, slow start window of 60 seconds, no active healcheck, 0.5 time bias and 1.0 aggression.
Endpoints E1 and E2 have statically configured initial weight of X, the actual numerical value is of no significance for this example.

> +-------------+--------------------+------------+------------+-----------+----------+-------------+

Author: have not started this one
